Chapter 1 The History and Limitations of Classical Mechanics
Chapter 1.1 Introduction................................................................................................................ 1

1

Chapter 1 The History and Limitations of Classical Mechanics
Chapter 1.1 Introduction
Classical mechanics is the mathematical science that studies the displacement of bodies
under the action of forces. Gailieo Galilee initiated the modern era of mechanics by using
mathematics to describe the motion of bodies. His Mechanics, published in 1623,
introduced the concepts of force and described the constant accelerated motion of objects
near the surface of the Earth. Sixty years later Isaac Newton formulated his Laws of
Motion, which he published in 1687 under the title, Philosophiae Naturalis Principia
Mathematica (Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy). In the third book,
subtitled De mundi systemate (On the system of the world), Newton solved the greatest
scientific problem of his time by applying his Universal Law of Gravitation to determine
the motion of planets. Newton established a mathematical approach to the analysis of
physical phenomena in which he stated that it was unnecessary to introduce final causes
(hypothesis) that have no experimental basis, “Hypotheses non fingo (I frame no
hypotheses), but that physical models are built from experimental observations and then
made general by induction. This led to a great century of applications of the principles of
Newtonian mechanics to many new problems culminating in the work of Leonhard Euler.
Euler began a systematic study of the three dimensional motion of rigid bodies, leading to
a set of dynamical equations now known as Euler’s equations of motion.
Alongside this development and refinement of the concept of force and its
application to the description of motion, the concept of energy slowly emerged,
culminating in the middle of the nineteenth century in the discovery of the principle of
conservation of energy and its immediate applications to the laws of thermodynamics.
Conservation principles are now central to our study of mechanics; the conservation of
momentum, energy, and angular momentum enabled a new reformulation of classical
mechanics.
During this period, the experimental methodology and mathematical tools of
Newtonian mechanics were applied to other non-rigid systems of particles leading to the
development of continuum mechanics. The theories of fluid mechanics, wave mechanics,
and electromagnetism emerged leading to the development of the wave theory of light.
However there were many perplexing aspects of the wave theory of light, for example,
does light propagate through a medium, the “ether”? A series of optics experiments,
culminating in the Michelson-Morley experiment in 1887 ruled out the hypothesis of a
stationary medium. Many attempts were made to reconcile the experimental evidence
with classical mechanics but the challenges were more fundamental. The basics concepts
of absolute time and absolute space, which Newton had defined in the Principia, were
themselves inadequate to explain a host of experimental observations. Albert Einstein, by
insisting on a fundamental rethinking of the concepts of space and time, and the relativity
of motion, in his special theory of relativity (1905) was able to resolve the apparent
conflicts between optics and Newtonian mechanics. In particular, special relativity
provides the necessary framework for describing the motion of rapidly moving objects
(speed greater than v > 0.1 c ).

2

A second limitation on the validity of Newtonian mechanics appeared at the
microscopic length scale. A new theory, statistical mechanics, was developed relating the
microscopic properties of individual atoms and molecules to the macroscopic or bulk
thermodynamic properties of materials. Started in the middle of the nineteenth century,
new observations at very small scales revealed anomalies in the predicted behavior of
gases (heat capacity). It became increasingly clear that classical mechanics did not
adequately explain a wide range of newly discovered phenomena at the atomic and subatomic length scales. An essential realization was that the language of classical
mechanics was not even adequate to qualitatively describe certain microscopic
phenomena. By the early part of the twentieth century, quantum mechanics provided a
mathematical description of microscopic phenomena in complete agreement with our
empirical knowledge of all non-relativistic phenomena.
In the twentieth century, as experimental observations led to a more detailed
knowledge of the large-scale properties of the universe, Newton’s Universal Law of
Gravitation no longer accurately modeled the observed universe and needed to be
replaced by general relativity. By the end of the twentieth century and beginning of the
twenty-first century, many new observations, for example the accelerated expansion of
the Universe, have required introduction of new concepts like dark energy that may lead
once again to a fundamental rethinking of the basic concepts of physics in order to
explain observed phenomena.

3

MIT OpenCourseWare
https://ocw.mit.edu

8.01 Classical Mechanics
Spring 2022

For information about citing these materials or our Terms of Use, visit: https://ocw.mit.edu/terms.

4

