4 KAUFMANN

existentialism
FROM DOSTOEVSKY TO SARTRE
Edited, with an introduction,
prefaces, and new translations
by WALTER KAUFMANN

MERIDIAN BOOKS, INC. New York

Walter Kaufmann
Born in Freiburg, Germany, Walter Kaufmann is a graduate of Williams
College. He received his doctorate from Har-vard University in 1947 and
in the same year joined the staff of Princeton University, where he is now
Associate Professor of Philosophy. A frequent contributor to scholarly
periodicals, he is also editor of the Portable Nietzsche and author of
Nietzsche (MERIDIAN BOOKS).

A Meridian Books Original Edition
First published by Meridian Books, Inc., October 1956 First printing
September 1956
Second printing February 1957
Third printing March 1957
Fourth printing June 1957
Fifth printing October 1957
Sixth printing March 1958
Seventh printing June 1958
Eighth printing November 1958
Ninth printing April 1959
Tenth printing August 1959
Eleventh printing January 1960
Twelfth printing April 1960
Copyright © 1956 by Meridian Books, Inc.
Library of Congress catalog card number: 56-10018
Manufactured in the United States of America
PDF by (-§ko-)

6 KAUFMANN

Contents
Preface
ONE :

9
KAUFMANN: Existentialism from Dostoevsky
to Sartre

11

TWO:

DOSTOEVSKY: Notes from Underground

52

THREE:

KIERKEGAARD: On Himself
1. On His Mission
2. On His Works
3. On His Mode of Existence
4. "That Individual"

83
84
85
86
92

FOUR:

NIETZSCHE: "Live Dangerously"
1. "The Challenge of Every Great Philosophy"
2. "The Gay Science"
3. On Free Death
4. The Beginning of The Will to Power
5. From Ecce Homo

100
101
104
107
109
111

FIVE:

RILKE: The Notes of Malte Laurids Brigge

113

SIX:

KAFKA: Three Parables
1. An Imperial Message
2. Before the Law
3. Couriers

121
123
124
130

SEVEN:

JASPERS: Existenzphilosophie
1. On My Philosophy
2. Kierkegaard and Nietzsche
3. The Encompassing

131
131
158
184

EIGHT:

HEIDEGGER: The Way Back into the Ground
of Metaphysics

206

NINE:

SARTRE: Existentialism
1. The Wall
2. Self-Deception
3. Portrait of the Antisemite
4. Existentialism is a Humanism

222
223
241
270
287

TEN:

CAMUS: The Myth of Sisyphus

312

Notes

317

Sources and Acknowledgments

321

8 KAUFMANN

Preface
Some anthologies treat great literature and philosophy as if they could be
used to furnish a cultural supermarket where the reader shops around. Of
course, it is the reader's right to browse, to skip, and not to read, whether a
volume is by a single author or by ten. What matters is that a book should
offer, when read straight through, more than the sum of the parts. The
present volume is intended to tell a story, and the growing variations of
some major themes, the echoes, and the contrasts ought to add not only to
the enjoyment but also to the reader's understanding.
There are several new translations made especially for this book.
Jaspers' essay "On My Philosophy" has been translated by Felix
Kaufmann, and I myself have translated the material from Nietzsche,
Rilke, and Heidegger.
I am deeply indebted to Princeton University for a year's leave of
absence and to the Fulbright Commission for a re-search grant which
enabled me, among other things, to listen to lectures by Jaspers and
Heidegger and to talk with them and many of their colleagues and former
students. To Heidegger I am also indebted for answering, orally and in
writing, questions about his essay which is here offered in English for the
first time.
My wife, Hazel Kaufmann, has given me invaluable aid and comfort.
W K.

ONE

Kaufmann: Existentialism from Dostoevsky to Sartre

Existentialism is not a philosophy but a label for several widely different
revolts against traditional philosophy. Most of the living "existentialists"
have repudiated this label, and a bewildered outsider might well conclude
that the only thing they have in common is a marked aversion for each
other. To add to the confusion, many writers of the past have frequently
been hailed as members of this movement, and it is extremely doubtful
whether they would have appreciated the company to which they are
consigned. In view of this, it might be argued that the label
"existentialism" ought to be abandoned altogether.
Certainly, existentialism is not a school of thought nor reducible to any
set of tenets. The three writers who appear invariably on every list of
"existentialists'' Jaspers, Heideg-ger, and Sartre-are not in agreement on
essentials. Such alleged precursors as Pascal and Kierkegaard differed
from all three men by being dedicated Christians; and Pascal was a
Catholic of sorts while Kierkegaard was a Protestant's Protestant. If, as is
often done, Nietzsche and Dostoevsky are in-cluded in the fold, we must
make room for an impassioned anti-Christian and an even more fanatical
Greek-Orthodox Russian imperialist. By the time we consider adding
Rilke, Kafka, and Camus, it becomes plain that one essential feature
shared by all these men is their perfervid individualism. (P11)

11

12 KAUFMANN

The refusal to belong to any school of thought, the repudiation of the
adequacy of any body of beliefs whatever, and especially of systems, and
a marked dissatisfaction with traditional philosophy as superficial,
academic, and remote from life-that is the heart of existentialism.
Existentialism is a timeless sensibility that can be discerned here and
there in the past; but it is only in recent times that it has hardened into a
sustained protest and preoccupation.
It may be best to begin with the story of existentialism before
attempting further generalizations. An effort to tell this story with a
positivist's penchant for particulars and a relent-less effort to suppress
one's individuality would only show that existentialism is completely
uncongenial to the writer. This is not meant to be a defense of
arbitrariness. A personal perspective may suggest one way of ordering
diffuse materials, and be fruitful, if only by way of leading others to
considered dissent.
I. DOSTOEVSKY

In some of the earliest philosophers, such as Pythagoras and Heraclitus
and Empedocles, we sense a striking unity of life and thought; and after
the generation of the Sophists, Socrates is said to have brought philosophy
down to earth again. In the Socratic schools and in Stoicism a little later,
philosophy is above all a way of life. Throughout the history of
philosophy other, more or less similar, examples come to mind, most
notably Spinoza. It is easy, and it was long fashionable, to overestimate
the beautiful serenity of men like these, and it is well to recall the vitriolic
barbs of Heraclitus, the inimitable sarcasm of Socrates, and the passions
of Spinoza. Even so, it is an altogether new voice that we hear in
Dostoevsky's Notes from Underground.
The pitch is new, the strained protest, the self-preoccupation. To note a
lack of serenity would be ridiculous: poise does not even remain as a
norm, not even as an element of contrast; it gives way to poses, masks-the
drama of the mind that is sufficient to itself, yet conscious of its every
weakness and determined to exploit it. What we perceive is an unheard-of
song of songs on individuality: not classical, not Biblical, and not at all
romantic. No, individuality is not re-touched, idealized, or holy; it is
wretched and revolting, and yet, for all its misery, the highest good.
The bias against science may remind us of romanticism;

Existentialism from Dostoevsky to Sartre 13

but the Notes from Underground are deeply unromantic. Nothing could be
further from that softening of the contours which distinguished all
romantics from the first attack on classicism to Novalis, Keats, and
Wordsworth. Romanticism is flight from the present, whether into the
past, the future, or another world, dreams, or, most often, a vague fog. It is
self-deception. Romanticism yearns for deliverance from the cross of the
Here and Now: it is willing to face anything but the facts.
The atmosphere of Dostoevsky's Notes is not one of soft voices and
dim lights: the voice could not be shriller, the light not more glaring. No
prize, however great, can justify an ounce of self-deception or a small
departure from the ugly facts. And yet this is not literary naturalism with
its infatuation with material circumstances: it is man's inner life, his
moods, anxieties, and his decisions, that are moved into the center until,
as it were, no scenery at all remains. This book, published in 1864, is one
of the most revolutionary and original works of world literature.
If we look for anything remotely similar in the long past of European
literature, we do not find it in philosophy but, most nearly, in such
Christian writers as Augustine and Pascal. Surely, the differences are far
more striking even here than any similarity; but it is in Christianity,
against the background of belief in original sin, that we first find this
wallowing in man's depravity and this uncompromising concentration on
the dark side of man's inner life.
In Rousseau's Confessions, too, his Calvinistic background has to be
recalled; but he turned against it and denied original sin, affirmed the
natural goodness of man, and blamed his depravity on society. Then he
proceeded to explain how all depravity could be abolished in the good
society, ruled by the general will. In Dostoevsky's Notes from
Underground no good society can rid man of depravity: the book is
among other things an inspired polemic against Rousseau and the whole
tradition of social philosophy from Plato and Aristotle through Hobbes
and Locke to Bentham, Hegel, and John Stuart Mill. The man whom
Dostoevsky has created in this book holds out for what traditional
Christianity has called depravity; but he believes neither in original sin
nor in God, and for him man's self-will is not depravity: it is only
per-verse from the point of view of rationalists and others who value neat
schemes above the rich texture of individuality.

14 KAUFMANN

Dostoevsky himself was a Christian, to be sure, and for that matter also
a rabid anti-Semite, anti-Catholic, and anti-Western Russian nationalist.
We have no right whatsoever to attribute to him the opinions of all of his
most interesting characters. Unfortunately, most readers fail to distinguish
between Dostoevsky's views and those of the Grand Inquisitor in Ivan's
story in The Brothers Karamazov, though it is patent that this figure was
inspired by the author's hatred of the Church of Rome; and many critics
take for Dostoevsky's reasoned judgments the strange views of Kirilov,
though he is mad. As a human being, Dostoevsky was as fascinating as
any of his characters; but we must not ascribe to him, who after all
believed in God, the outlook and ideas of his underground man.
I can see no reason for calling Dostoevsky an existentialist, but I do
think that Part One of Notes from Underground is the best overture for
existentialism ever written. With inimitable vigor and finesse the major
themes are stated here that we can recognize when reading all the other
so-called existentialists from Kierkegaard to Camus.
II. KIERKEGAARD

Kierkegaard was dead nine years when Notes from Under-ground was
published first in 1864. He had not known of Dostoevsky, nor did
Dostoevsky know of him. Nietzsche, on the other hand, read Notes from
Underground in 1887 and was impressed as rarely in his life; and a year
and a half later, toward the end of his career, he heard of Kierkegaard, too
late to secure any of his books. Henceforth, the sequence of our major
characters is clear. It is only at the beginning, faced with Kierkegaard and
Dostoevsky, that we do better to reverse the strict chronology to start with
Dostoevsky.
Kierkegaard confronts us as an individual while Dostoevsky offers us a
world. Both are infinitely disturbing, but there is an overwhelming
vastness about Dostoevsky and a strident narrowness about Kierkegaard.
If one comes from Kierkegaard and plunges into Dostoevsky, one is lost
like a man brought up in a small room who is suddenly placed in a
sailboat in the middle of the ocean. Or you might even think that
Dostoevsky had set out deliberately to make fun of Kierkegaard. Those,
on the other hand, who listen to the Notes from Underground as to an
overture, are well prepared when the curtain rises to hear Kierkegaard's
account of how

Existentialism from Dostoevsky to Sartre 15

he first became a writer. Even his Point of View for My Work as an
Author won't be altogether unfamiliar. It is as if Kierkegaard had stepped
right out of Dostoevsky's pen.
The underground man pictures the ease of the "crystal palace" as a
distant possibility and tells us that some individual would certainly rebel
and try to wreck this utterly insufferable comfort. And Kierkegaard, not
exiled to Siberia, as Dostoevsky was as a young man, but well-to-do in
the clean, wholesome atmosphere of Copenhagen, sees how easy life is
being made and resolves "to create difficulties everywhere."
If it is the besetting fault of Dostoevsky criticism that the views and
arguments of some of his characters are ascribed, without justification, to
the author, the characteristic flaw of the growing literature on Kierkegaard
is that the author is forgotten altogether and his works are read
impersonally as one might read those of Hegel. Nothing could be less in
keeping with the author's own intentions. Hence it is well to begin a study
of Kierkegaard with The Point of View for My Work as an Author.
How strange Kierkegaard is when he speaks of himself, and how
similar to Dostoevsky's underground man-in con-tents, style, and
sensibility! There is something novel about both which may be brought
out by a brief contrast with Heinrich Heine. Heine's self-consciousness is
almost proverbial and at one time embarrassed romantic readers; but the
strain in Heine is due largely to the tension between reverie and reason.
Kierkegaard's self-consciousness, like the underground man's, is far more
embarrassing because it comes from his humiliating concern with the
reactions and the judgments of the very public which he constantly
professes to despise. That he was physically misshapen might have
remained without effect on his style and thought; but, like the
underground man, he was inwardly out of joint –so much so that Heine
seems quite healthy by comparison. How fluent is Heine's prose, and how
contorted Kierkegaard's! Their love of irony and even vitriol they shared;
but Heine's world is relatively neat and clean-cut: even his melancholy
seems pleasant com-pared to Kierkegaard's. They were contemporaries
who died within a year, and yet Heine seems almost classical today, and
Kierkegaard painfully modern.
Both concerned themselves with Hegel: Heine even knew him
personally, while Kierkegaard, a little younger, heard

16 KAUFMANN

only the diatribes of the old Schelling after Hegel's death. Heine came to
part with Hegel because the philosopher was not liberal enough for him
and too authoritarian. For Kierkegaard, Hegel was too rational and liberal.
Heine cannot fairly be called a romantic because he steadfastly refused to
give up the ideals of the Enlightenment and because he would not curb his
piercing critical intelligence to spare a feeling. Kierkegaard escapes
classification as a romantic because he, too, rejects the dim twilight of
sentiment as well as any lovely synthesis of intellect and feeling, to insist
on the absurdity of the beliefs which he accepts.
Dostoevsky is surely one of the giants of world literature; Kierkegaard,
one of its greatest oddities: an occasionally brilliant but exasperating
stylist, a frequently befuddled thinker, yet a writer who intrigues and
fascinates by virtue of his individuality. His own suggestion for his
epitaph is unsurpassable: "That Individual."
Kierkegaard not only was an individual but tried to introduce the
individual into our thinking as a category. In the vast thicket of his
unpruned prose it is not easy to discover his importance for philosophy.
He was an aggressive thinker, and the main targets of his attacks are
Hegel, of whom he lacked any thorough first-hand knowledge, and
Christianity as it existed for approximately eighteen centuries, which
seems at first glance to have no immediate bearing on philosophy. In fact,
(Content truncated due to size limit. Use page ranges or line ranges to read remaining content)