Fluid Mechanics

McGraw-Hill Series in Mechanical Engineering
Alciatore/Histand
Introduction to Mechatronics and Measurement Systems
Anderson
Computational Fluid Dynamics: The Basics with Applications
Anderson
Fundamentals of Aerodynamics
Anderson
Introduction to Flight
Anderson
Modern Compressible Flow
Beer/Johnston
Vector Mechanics for Engineers: Statics and Dynamics
Beer/Johnston
Mechanics of Materials
Budynas
Advanced Strength and Applied Stress Analysis
Budynas/Nisbett
Shigley’s Mechanical Engineering Design
Çengel
Heat and Mass Transfer: A Practical Approach
Çengel
Introduction to Thermodynamics & Heat Transfer
Çengel/Boles
Thermodynamics: An Engineering Approach
Çengel/Cimbala
Fluid Mechanics: Fundamentals and Applications

Çengel/Turner
Fundamentals of Thermal-Fluid Sciences
Dieter
Engineering Design: A Materials & Processing Approach
Dieter
Mechanical Metallurgy
Dorf/Byers
Technology Ventures: From Idea to Enterprise
Finnemore/Franzini
Fluid Mechanics with Engineering Applications
Hamrock/Schmid/Jacobson
Fundamentals of Machine Elements
Heywood
Internal Combustion Engine Fundamentals
Holman
Experimental Methods for Engineers
Holman
Heat Transfer
Kays/Crawford/Weigand
Convective Heat and Mass Transfer
Meirovitch
Fundamentals of Vibrations
Norton
Design of Machinery
Palm
System Dynamics
Reddy

An Introduction to Finite Element Method
Schey
Introduction to Manufacturing Processes
Smith/Hashemi
Foundations of Materials Science and Engineering
Turns
An Introduction to Combustion: Concepts and Applications
Ugural
Mechanical Design: An Integrated Approach
Ullman
The Mechanical Design Process
White
Fluid Mechanics
White
Viscous Fluid Flow

Fluid Mechanics
Seventh Edition

Frank M. White
University of Rhode Island

FLUID MECHANICS, Seventh EDITION
Published by McGraw-Hill, a business unit of The McGraw-Hill
Companies, Inc., 1221 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10020.
Copyright © 2011 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. All rights
reserved. Previous editions © 2008, 2003, and 1999. No part of this
publication may be reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means,
or stored in a database or retrieval system, without the prior written consent
of The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc., including, but not limited to, in any
network or other electronic storage or transmission, or broadcast for
distance learning.
Some ancillaries, including electronic and print components, may not be
available to customers outside the United States.
This book is printed on acid-free paper.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 DOC/DOC 1 0 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0
ISBN 978-0-07-352934-9
MHID 0-07-352934-6

Vice President & Editor-in-Chief: Marty Lange
Vice President, EDP/Central Publishing Services:
Meriwether-David
Global Publisher: Raghothaman Srinivasan
Senior Sponsoring Editor: Bill Stenquist
Director of Development: Kristine Tibbetts
Developmental Editor: Lora Neyens
Senior Marketing Manager: Curt Reynolds
Senior Project Manager: Lisa A. Bruflodt
Production Supervisor: Nicole Baumgartner
Design Coordinator: Brenda A. Rolwes
Cover Designer: Studio Montage, St. Louis, Missouri
(USE) Cover Image: Copyright SkySails
Senior Photo Research Coordinator: John C. Leland
Photo Research: Emily Tietz/Editorial Image, LLC
Compositor: Aptara, Inc.
Typeface: 10/12 Times Roman
Printer: R. R. Donnelley

Kimberly

All credits appearing on page or at the end of the book are considered to
be an extension of the copyright page.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

White, Frank M.
Fluid mechanics / Frank M. White. —7th ed.
p. cm. —(Mcgraw-Hill series in mechanical engineering)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978–0–07–352934–9 (alk. paper)
1. Fluid mechanics. I. Title.
TA357.W48 2009
620.1’06—dc22
2009047498
www.mhhe.com

About the Author
Frank M. White is Professor Emeritus of Mechanical and Ocean
Engineering at the University of Rhode Island. He studied at Georgia Tech and
M.I.T. In 1966 he helped found, at URI, the first department of ocean
engineering in the country. Known primarily as a teacher and writer, he has
received eight teaching awards and has written four textbooks on fluid
mechanics and heat transfer.
From 1979 to 1990 he was editor-in-chief of the ASME Journal of Fluids
Engineering and then served from 1991 to 1997 as chairman of the ASME
Board of Editors and of the Publications Committee. He is a Fellow of ASME
and in 1991 received the ASME Fluids Engineering Award. He lives with his
wife, Jeanne, in Narragansett, Rhode Island.

To Jeanne

Contents

Preface

Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1 Preliminary Remarks
1.2 History and Scope of Fluid Mechanics
1.3 Problem-Solving Techniques
1.4 The Concept of a Fluid
1.5 The Fluid as a Continuum
1.6 Dimensions and Units
1.7 Properties of the Velocity Field
1.8 Thermodynamic Properties of a Fluid
1.9 Viscosity and Other Secondary Properties
1.10 Basic Flow Analysis Techniques
1.11 Flow Patterns: Streamlines, Streaklines, and Pathlines
1.12 The Engineering Equation Solver
1.13 Uncertainty in Experimental Data
1.14 The Fundamentals of Engineering (FE) Examination
Problems
Fundamentals of Engineering Exam Problems
Comprehensive Problems
References
Chapter 2
Pressure Distribution in a Fluid
2.1 Pressure and Pressure Gradient

2.2 Equilibrium of a Fluid Element
2.3 Hydrostatic Pressure Distributions
2.4 Application to Manometry
2.5 Hydrostatic Forces on Plane Surfaces
2.6 Hydrostatic Forces on Curved Surfaces
2.7 Hydrostatic Forces in Layered Fluids
2.8 Buoyancy and Stability
2.9 Pressure Distribution in Rigid-Body Motion
2.10 Pressure Measurement
Summary
Problems
Word Problems
Fundamentals of Engineering Exam Problems
Comprehensive Problems
Design Projects
References
Chapter 3
Integral Relations for a Control Volume
3.1 Basic Physical Laws of Fluid Mechanics
3.2 The Reynolds Transport Theorem
3.3 Conservation of Mass
3.4 The Linear Momentum Equation
3.5 Frictionless Flow: The Bernoulli Equation
3.6 The Angular Momentum Theorem
3.7 The Energy Equation
Summary
Problems
Word Problems
Fundamentals of Engineering Exam Problems
Comprehensive Problems
Design Project
References
Chapter 4
Differential Relations for Fluid Flow

4.1 The Acceleration Field of a Fluid
4.2 The Differential Equation of Mass Conservation
4.3 The Differential Equation of Linear Momentum
4.4 The Differential Equation of Angular Momentum
4.5 The Differential Equation of Energy
4.6 Boundary Conditions for the Basic Equations
4.7 The Stream Function
4.8 Vorticity and Irrotationality
4.9 Frictionless Irrotational Flows
4.10 Some Illustrative Incompressible Viscous Flows
Summary
Problems
Word Problems
Fundamentals of Engineering Exam Problems
Comprehensive Problems
References
Chapter 5
Dimensional Analysis and Similarity
5.1 Introduction
5.2 The Principle of Dimensional Homogeneity
5.3 The Pi Theorem
5.4 Nondimensionalization of the Basic Equations
5.5 Modeling and Its Pitfalls
Summary
Problems
Word Problems
Fundamentals of Engineering Exam Problems
Comprehensive Problems
Design Projects
References
Chapter 6
Viscous Flow in Ducts
6.1 Reynolds Number Regimes

6.2 Internal versus External Viscous Flow
6.3 Head Loss—The Friction Factor
6.4 Laminar Fully Developed Pipe Flow
6.5 Turbulence Modeling
6.6 Turbulent Pipe Flow
6.7 Four Types of Pipe Flow Problems
6.8 Flow in Noncircular Ducts
6.9 Minor or Local Losses in Pipe Systems
6.10 Multiple-Pipe Systems
6.11 Experimental Duct Flows: Diffuser Performance
6.12 Fluid Meters
Summary
Problems
Word Problems
Fundamentals of Engineering Exam Problems
Comprehensive Problems
Design Projects
References
Chapter 7
Flow Past Immersed Bodies
7.1 Reynolds Number and Geometry Effects
7.2 Momentum Integral Estimates
7.3 The Boundary Layer Equations
7.4 The Flat-Plate Boundary Layer
7.5 Boundary Layers with Pressure Gradient
7.6 Experimental External Flows
Summary
Problems
Word Problems
Fundamentals of Engineering Exam Problems
Comprehensive Problems
Design Project
References
Chapter 8

Potential Flow and Computational Fluid Dynamics
8.1 Introduction and Review
8.2 Elementary Plane Flow Solutions
8.3 Superposition of Plane Flow Solutions
8.4 Plane Flow Past Closed-Body Shapes
8.5 Other Plane Potential Flows
8.6 Images
8.7 Airfoil Theory
8.8 Axisymmetric Potential Flow
8.9 Numerical Analysis
Summary
Problems
Word Problems
Comprehensive Problems
Design Projects
References
Chapter 9
Compressible Flow
9.1 Introduction: Review of Thermodynamics
9.2 The Speed of Sound
9.3 Adiabatic and Isentropic Steady Flow
9.4 Isentropic Flow with Area Changes
9.5 The Normal Shock Wave
9.6 Operation of Converging and Diverging Nozzles
9.7 Compressible Duct Flow with Friction
9.8 Frictionless Duct Flow with Heat Transfer
9.9 Two-Dimensional Supersonic Flow
9.10 Prandtl-Meyer Expansion Waves
Summary
Problems
Word Problems
Fundamentals of Engineering Exam Problems
Comprehensive Problems
Design Projects
References

Chapter 10
Open-Channel Flow
10.1 Introduction
10.2 Uniform Flow: The Chézy Formula
10.3 Efficient Uniform-Flow Channels
10.4 Specific Energy: Critical Depth
10.5 The Hydraulic Jump
10.6 Gradually Varied Flow
10.7 Flow Measurement and Control by Weirs
Summary
Problems
Word Problems
Fundamentals of Engineering Exam Problems
Comprehensive Problems
Design Projects
References
Chapter 11
Turbomachinery
11.1 Introduction and Classification
11.2 The Centrifugal Pump
11.3 Pump Performance Curves and Similarity Rules
11.4 Mixed-and Axial-Flow Pumps: The Specific Speed
11.5 Matching Pumps to System Characteristics
11.6 Turbines
Summary
Problems
Word Problems
Comprehensive Problems
Design Project
References
Appendix A Physical Properties of Fluids

Appendix B Compressible Flow Tables

Appendix C Conversion Factors

Appendix D Equations of Motion in Cylindrical Coordinates

Answers to Selected Problems

Index

Preface

General Approach
The seventh edition of Fluid Mechanics sees some additions and deletions
but no philosophical change. The basic outline of eleven chapters, plus
appendices, remains the same. The triad of integral, differential, and
experimental approaches is retained. Many problem exercises, and some fully
worked examples, have been changed. The informal, student-oriented style is
retained. A number of new photographs and figures have been added. Many new
references have been added, for a total of 435. The writer is a firm believer in
“further reading,” especially in the postgraduate years.

Learning Tools
The total number of problem exercises continues to increase, from 1089 in
the first edition, to 1675 in this seventh edition. There are approximately 20 new
problems added to each chapter. Most of these are basic end-of-chapter
problems, classified according to topic. There are also Word Problems, multiplechoice Fundamentals of Engineering Problems, Comprehensive Problems, and
Design Projects. The appendix lists approximately 700 Answers to Selected
Problems.
The example problems are structured in the text to follow the sequence of
recommended steps outlined in Sect. 1.3, Problem-Solving Techniques.
The Engineering Equation Solver (EES) is available with the text and
continues its role as an attractive tool for fluid mechanics and, indeed, other
engineering problems. Not only is it an excellent solver, but it also contains
thermophysical properties, publication-quality plotting, units checking, and
many mathematical functions, including numerical integration. The author is
indebted to Sanford Klein and William Beckman, of the University of
Wisconsin, for invaluable and continuous help in preparing and updating EES

for use in this text. For newcomers to EES, a brief guide to its use is found on
this book’s website.

Content Changes
There are some revisions in each chapter.
Chapter 1 has added material on the history of late 20th century fluid
mechanics, notably the development of Computational Fluid Dynamics. A very
brief introduction to the acceleration field has been added. Boundary conditions
for slip flow have been added. There is more discussion of the speed of sound in
liquids. The treatment of thermal conductivity has been moved to Chapter 4.
Chapter 2 introduces a photo, discussion, and new problems for the deep
ocean submersible vehicle, ALVIN. The density distribution in the troposphere is
now given explicitly. There are brief remarks on the great Greek mathematician,
Archimedes.
Chapter 3 has been substantially revised. Reviewers wanted Bernoulli’s
equation moved ahead of angular velocity and energy, to follow linear
momentum. I did this and followed their specific improvements, but truly
extensive renumbering and rearranging was necessary. Pressure and velocity
conditions at a tank surface have an improved discussion. A brief history of the
control volume has been added. There is a better treatment of the relation
between Bernoulli’s equation and the energy equation. There is a new discussion
of stagnation, static and dynamic pressures, and boundary conditions at a jet exit.
Chapter 4 has a great new opener: CFD for flow past a spinning soccer ball.
The total time derivative of velocity is now written out in full. Fourier’s Law,
and its application to the differential energy equation, have been moved here
from Chapter 1. There are 21 new problems, including several slip-flow
analyses.
The Chapter 5 introduction expands on the effects of Mach number and
Froude number, instead of concentrating only on the Reynolds number. Ipsen’s
method, which the writer admires, is retained as an alternative to the pi theorem.
The new opener, a giant disk-band-gap parachute, allows for several new
dimensional analysis problems.
Chapter 6 has a new formula for entrance length in turbulent duct flow, sent
to me by two different researchers. There is a new problem describing the flow
in a fuel cell. The new opener, the Trans-Alaska Pipeline, allows for several
innovative problems, including a related one on the proposed Alaska-Canada
natural gas pipeline.

Chapter 7 has an improved description of turbulent flow past a flat plate,
plus recent reviews of progress in turbulence modeling with CFD. Two new
aerodynamic advances are reported: the Finaish-Witherspoon redesign of the
Kline-Fogelman airfoil and the increase in stall angle achieved by tubercles
modeled after a humpback whale. The new Transition® flying car, which had a
successful maiden flight in 2009, leads to a number of good problem
assignments. Two other photos, Rocket Man over the Alps, and a cargo ship
propelled by a kite, also lead to interesting new problems.
Chapter 8 is essentially unchanged, except for a bit more discussion of
modern CFD software. The Transition® autocar, featured in Chapter 7, is
attacked here by aerodynamic theory, including induced drag.
Chapter 9 benefited from reviewer improvement. Figure 9.7, with its 30year-old curve-fits for the area ratio, has been replaced with fine-gridded curves
for the area-change properties. The curve-fits are gone, and Mach numbers
follow nicely from Fig. 9.7 and either Excel or EES. New Trends in Aeronautics
presents the X-43 Scramjet airplane, which generates several new problem
assignments. Data for the proposed Alaska-to-Canada natural gas pipeline
provides a different look at frictional choking.
Chapter 10 is basically the same, except for new photos of both plane and
circular hydraulic jumps, plus a tidal bore, with their associated problem
assignments.
Chapter 11 has added a section on the performance of gas turbines, with
application to turbofan aircraft engines. The section on wind turbines has been
updated, with new data and photos. A wind-turbine-driven vehicle, which can
easily move directly into the wind, has inspired new problem assignments.
Appendix A has new data on the bulk modulus of various liquids. Appendix
B, Compressible Flow Tables, has been shortened by using coarser increments
(0.1) in Mach number. Tables with much smaller increments are now on the
bookswebsite. Appendix E, Introduction to EES, has been deleted and moved to
the website, on the theory that most students are now quite familiar with EES.

Online Supplements
A number of supplements are available to students and/or instructors at the
text website www.mhhe.com/white7e. Students have access to a Student Study
(Content truncated due to size limit. Use page ranges or line ranges to read remaining content)